🤓 Content for release: `13.5` (#1233)
microsoft/aspire.dev: src/frontend/src/content/docs/deployment/kubernetes/persistent-volumes.mdx

<Tabs syncKey="aspire-lang">
<TabItem id="csharp" label="C#">

```csharp title="AppHost.cs"
var k8s = builder.AddKubernetesEnvironment("k8s");

var pgData = k8s.AddPersistentVolume("pg-data")
    .WithStorageClass("managed-csi")
    .WithCapacity("20Gi");
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem id="typescript" label="TypeScript">

```typescript title="apphost.mts"
const k8s = await builder.addKubernetesEnvironment('k8s');

const pgData = await k8s.addPersistentVolume('pg-data');
await pgData.withStorageClass('managed-csi');
await pgData.withCapacity('20Gi');
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

At publish time, the volume renders as a `v1.PersistentVolumeClaim` in the generated Helm chart. Like [ingress and gateway resources](/deployment/kubernetes-ingress/), you configure the volume once and reference it from workloads, rather than relying on a single environment-wide storage shape for every mount.

<Aside type="note">
  The persistent volume APIs are experimental. In C#, suppress the `ASPIRECOMPUTE002` diagnostic to use them.

> </Aside>

Reviewer: Consider moving this Aside into the above C# TabItem.

## Prerequisites

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The following prerequisites must be in place before you can use persistent volumes in a Kubernetes cluster:

```

await pg.withDataVolume({ name: 'pg-data' });
await pg.withKubernetesPersistentVolume(pgData);
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Bind with a mount path

Use the mount-path overload when the workload doesn't already declare a named volume. It creates the mount itself, so it works for projects and any compute resource. Pass the mount path inside the container, and optionally mount read-only:

<Tabs syncKey="aspire-lang">
<TabItem id="csharp" label="C#">

```csharp title="AppHost.cs"
var media = k8s.AddPersistentVolume("media")
    .WithStorageClass("azurefile-csi")
    .WithCapacity("100Gi")
    .WithAccessMode(PersistentVolumeAccessMode.ReadWriteMany);

builder.AddProject<Projects.Api>("api")
    .WithPersistentVolume(media, "/srv/media");
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem id="typescript" label="TypeScript">

```typescript title="apphost.mts"
const media = await k8s.addPersistentVolume('media');
await media.withStorageClass('azurefile-csi');
await media.withCapacity('100Gi');

const api = await builder.addProject('api');
await api.withKubernetesPersistentVolumeMount(media, '/srv/media');
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

<Aside type="caution" title="Workloads are promoted to StatefulSet">

>   Any workload bound to a persistent volume is rendered as a `StatefulSet` instead of a `Deployment`, regardless of its default workload kind. There is no opt-out. A `Deployment` with a `ReadWriteOnce` claim and more than one replica is broken by design — the second pod can't mount the same volume — so binding to a durable volume automatically selects the `StatefulSet` path, which gives pods stable identity and ordered rollout.

Reviewer: Simplify the third sentence in this paragraph by splitting it:

```suggestion
  Any workload bound to a persistent volume is rendered as a `StatefulSet` instead of a `Deployment`, regardless of its default workload kind. There is no opt-out. A `Deployment` with a `ReadWriteOnce` claim and more than one replica is broken by design because the second pod can't mount the same volume. Therefore, binding to a durable volume automatically selects the `StatefulSet` path, which gives pods stable identity and ordered rollout.
```
